## PostgreSQL Basic:

PostgreSQL is a powerful, open-source Object-Relational Database Management System (ORDBMS) known for reliability, extensibility, and standards compliance.

It is widely used for:
- Enterprise applications
- Financial systems
- Government platforms
- Web & SaaS applications
- Data analytics systems



### PostgreSQL Editions Overview:

#### 1. PostgreSQL Community Edition (Core PostgreSQL):
The official open-source version. 
- License: PostgreSQL License (very permissive, similar to BSD)
- 100% free
- Includes:
    - MVCC (Multi-Version Concurrency Control)
    - Streaming Replication
    - Logical Replication
    - Partitioning
    - JSON/JSONB
    - Extensions (PostGIS, pg_stat_statements, etc.)
    - WAL-based recovery
- PostgreSQL does NOT restrict core features like encryption or replication to paid versions.
- 📌 Best for: Almost everything — startups to large enterprises.



#### 2. EnterpriseDB (EDB Postgres):

Developed by EnterpriseDB. They provide:

#### a) EDB Postgres Advanced Server (EPAS):
- Oracle compatibility features (PL/SQL, packages, synonyms)
- Advanced auditing
- Enhanced performance tools
- Enterprise management tools


#### b) EDB Standard Postgres:
- Same as community PostgreSQL
- Commercial support only
- 📌 Best for: Enterprises migrating from Oracle or needing vendor support.



#### 3. Cloud Vendor Editions

Many cloud providers package PostgreSQL with additional management:
- Amazon RDS for PostgreSQL
- Azure Database for PostgreSQL
- Google Cloud SQL for PostgreSQL
- 📌 Best for: Managed infrastructure, DevOps simplicity.


#### 4. Other Enterprise Distributions:
- Percona PostgreSQL (optimized builds + support)





## Key Features of PostgreSQL:

### Open Source:
- Free to use
- Strong global community support
- Regular updates and security patches


### ACID Compliant:

A **transaction** is a sequence of one or more SQL operations that are executed as a single logical unit of work. A transaction **must be completed fully** or **not at all** — ensuring the `integrity` and `consistency` of the database.

📌 **ACID** is an acronym that defines the key properties that ensure reliable processing of database transactions. These principles guarantee that even in cases of system failures, power loss, or errors, the database remains correct and consistent.

_These properties ensure reliable transaction processing:_

| Property            | Description                                                              |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **A - Atomicity**   | All operations in a transaction succeed, or none do. No partial changes. |
| **C - Consistency** | The database remains in a valid state before and after the transaction.  |
| **I - Isolation**   | Concurrent transactions do not interfere with each other.                |
| **D - Durability**  | Once committed, the changes are permanent, even after a crash.           |


#### Atomicity: 
- **"All or nothing."**
- A transaction is treated as a single unit.
- Either all operations within the transaction are completed successfully, or none are applied.
- If any part fails, the database is rolled back to its previous state.
- All queries must succeed. If one fail all should rollback.
- **Example**: If money is withdrawn from one account but fails to deposit into another, the withdrawal should also be canceled.


#### Consistency: 
- **"Preserve database rules."**
- A transaction must take the database from one valid state to another.
- Data must remain consistent with rules, constraints, and relationships defined in the schema.
- **Example**: A student ID must always be unique — a transaction violating that constraint will fail.

- Consistency in Data
	- defined by the user
	- referential integrity (foreign keys)
	- atomicity
	- isolation
- Consistency in reads
	- if a transaction committed a change will a new transaction immediately see the change?
	- relational and NoSQL databases suffer from this
	- eventual consistency


#### Isolation:

- **"Transactions don’t interfere with each other."**
- Multiple transactions can run concurrently without impacting each other's execution.
- The result should be the same as if the transactions were run one after the other.
- **Example**: Two users booking the last seat on a flight at the same time — isolation ensures only one succeeds.

- Can my inflight transaction see changes made by other transactions?
- Read phenomena
	- Dirty reads
	- Non-repeatable reads
	- Phantom reads
	- (Lost updates)
- Isolation levels


#### Durability:

- **"Once committed, always saved."**
- After a transaction is committed, changes are permanent, even in case of system crash or power failure.
- Ensures data is safely stored to disk.
- Commited transactions must be persisted in a durable non-volatile storage. 



#### Summary of ACID Table:

| Property        | Meaning                          | Goal                          |
| --------------- | -------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| **Atomicity**   | All-or-nothing execution         | Avoid partial changes         |
| **Consistency** | Valid state before/after         | Enforce rules and constraints |
| **Isolation**   | Independent concurrent execution | Prevent transaction conflicts |
| **Durability**  | Permanence of committed changes  | Survive crashes and failures  |





### MVCC (Multi-Version Concurrency Control):
MVCC is a mechanism PostgreSQL uses to handle concurrent transactions without locking the whole table, ensuring high concurrency while maintaining ACID properties.

- Each transaction sees a consistent snapshot of the database as of the time it started.
- Each transaction sees only tuples (A row in PostgreSQL is called a tuple) that are visible according to its snapshot.
- Old versions (not visible) are cleaned by autovacuum



### Advanced Data Types:

Supports:
- JSON / JSONB
- Arrays
- UUID
- XML
- HSTORE
- Custom data types


### Extensibility:

PostgreSQL allows:

- ustom functions
- Stored procedures
- Extensions (PostGIS, pg_stat_statements, etc.)
- Custom operators and data types


### High Availability & Replication:

- Streaming Replication
- Logical Replication
- Failover support
- Point-in-Time Recovery (PITR)


### Strong Security:

- Role-based access control
- SSL support
- Row-Level Security (RLS)
- LDAP / PAM authentication





## Database Management System (DBMS):

### What Is Data?
Data is a collection of individual facts/raw  or statistics.
Data can come in the form of text, observations, figures, images, numbers, graphs, or symbols. For example, data might include individual prices, weights, addresses, ages, names, temperatures, dates, or distances.

- Data is unorganised and unrefined facts or Data is a raw and unorganized fact.
- Data is an individual unit that contains raw materials which do not carry any specific meaning.
- Data doesn’t depend on information.


_There are two main types of data:_

- **Quantitative data**: is provided in numerical form, like the weight, volume, or cost of an item.
- **Qualitative data**: is descriptive, but non-numerical, like the name, sex, or eye color of a person.



### What Is Information?
Information is processed, organised and structured data. It provides context for data and enables decision making.

- Information comprises processed, organised data presented in a meaningful context
- Information is a group of data that collectively carries a logical meaning.
- Information depends on data.



### Database:

A database is an organized collection of data that is stored and accessed electronically. It is the collection of tables, queries, reports, views and other objects.  It allows data to be efficiently inserted, managed, retrieved, and updated.


### Database Management System: 

Database management system is a software which is used to manage the database. A Database Management System (DBMS) is software that allows users to define, create, manage, and manipulate databases. It provides an interface between users/applications and the data stored in a structured format, ensuring data integrity, security, and efficient access.


A database management system (DBMS) is system software for creating and managing databases and software through which we can store data, access data and manage data. 

_Typically, a DBMS has the following **elements**:_
- Kernel code:
    - This code manages memory and storage for the DBMS.

- Repository of metadata:
    - This repository is usually called a data dictionary.

- Query language:
    - This language enables applications to access the data.




### Key Functions of a DBMS:

- **Data Definition** : `Create`, `alter`, and `drop` database schemas (using DDL: Data Definition Language).
- **Data Manipulation** : `Insert`, `update`, `delete`, and `SELECT` query data (using DML: Data Manipulation Language).
- **Data Security** : Control access to data (authentication, authorization).
- **Transaction Management** : Ensure data consistency and recovery through ACID properties.
- **Concurrency Control** : Allow multiple users to access data simultaneously without conflict.
- **Backup and Recovery** : Provide data restoration capabilities in case of failure.



### Data Definition Language (DDL):

Defines and modifies database structure (schema).

- Used to define database objects like `tables`, `indexes`, `views`, etc.
- Changes made using DDL affect the structure of the database.
- DDL statements include `CREATE Table`, `ALTER Table`, `DROP Table`, `RENAME`, `TRUNCATE`, `CREATE INDEX`.
- DDL statements are not transactional, meaning they cannot be rolled back.
- DDL does not use WHERE clause in its statement.
- DDL statements are usually executed by a database administrator.
- Example: 

```
CREATE TABLE employees (
  id INT PRIMARY KEY,
  name VARCHAR(100),
  department VARCHAR(50)
);

ALTER TABLE employees ADD salary DECIMAL(10, 2);

DROP TABLE old_employees;
```


### Data Manipulation Language (DML):

Used to access and manipulate the data within existing database objects.

- Used to manipulate data within the database.
- Changes made using DML affect the data stored in the database.
- DML statements include `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE`, `MERGE`
- DML statements are transactional, meaning they can be rolled back if necessary.
- While DML uses WHERE clause in its statement.
- DML statements are executed by application developers or end-users.
- Example: 

```
INSERT INTO employees (id, name, department, salary) VALUES (1, 'Alice', 'HR', 55000.00);

UPDATE employees SET salary = 60000.00 WHERE id = 1;

DELETE FROM employees WHERE department = 'HR';

SELECT * FROM employees;
```



### SQL Commands Overview: 

SQL is divided into 5 types of sub-languages based on nature of commands.

- DDL: Object level
	- Used to create or change or delete any database objects.
	- `CREATE` – Create a new table, view, index, etc.
    - `ALTER` – Modify the structure of existing database objects.
    - `DROP` – Delete database objects.
    - `TRUNCATE` – Quickly remove all records from a table (no rollback).
    - `RENAME` – Rename a database object.
	
- DML: Data level
	- select (data query lanuage)
    - `INSERT` – Add new data.
    - `UPDATE` – Modify existing data.
    - `DELETE` – Remove data.
    - Note: DML operations can be rolled back or committed (transactional).

	
- DCL: Control level (These commands are used by DBA)
	- `GRANT` – Give privileges to users.
    - `REVOKE` – Take away privileges.
	
- TCL: Transaction level
	- `COMMIT` – Save changes made in a transaction.
    - `ROLLBACK` – Undo changes made in the current transaction.
    - `SAVEPOINT` – Set a point to rollback to within a transaction.

- DQL/DRL: Selection level (retrieval)
    - `SELECT` – Retrieve data (may include filtering, joins, grouping, etc.)




### What is RDBMS?

RDBMS stands for Relational Database Management System.

It is a type of database system that stores data in the form of tables (relations) and manages the relationships between those tables.

In short, an RDBMS is a DBMS that organizes data in tables with rows and columns and supports relationships between them.

Data is organized into:
- Rows (Records) → Individual entries
- Columns (Fields) → Attributes of data


Examples of popular RDBMS software include:
- **Oracle DB** : Enterprise-grade RDBMS with powerful features.
- **MySQL** : Open-source RDBMS widely used in web applications.
- **PostgreSQL** : Advanced open-source RDBMS with strong standards compliance.
- **Microsoft SQL Server**: Relational DBMS by Microsoft for managing, storing, and retrieving data efficiently.
- **MongoDB** : Document-based NoSQL DB, great for semi-structured data.
- **SQLite** : Lightweight, serverless RDBMS used in embedded systems.




## PostgreSQL Internal Architecture (Detailed – DBA Level):

To understand it clearly, we divide the architecture into:

1. Process Architecture   
2. Memory Architecture   
3. Storage Architecture (Data Files + WAL)  


### 1. PostgreSQL Process Architecture:

PostgreSQL follows a client-server architecture:


#### Components: (High-Level)
- Client → Application / psql
- Postmaster (postgres process) → Main server process
- Background processes:
	- WAL Writer
	- Checkpointer
	- Autovacuum
- Data Files → Stored in data directory
- WAL (Write Ahead Log) → Ensures durability




Below is a logical representation of PostgreSQL process flow:

```
Client Application (psql / App)
        |
        v
+-------------------+
|   Postmaster      |  (Main postgres process)
+-------------------+
        |
        |---- Backend Process (per connection)
        |
        |---- Background Processes
                 |-- Checkpointer
                 |-- WAL Writer
                 |-- Background Writer
                 |-- Autovacuum Launcher
                 |-- Archiver
                 |-- Stats Collector
```




#### i. Postmaster (Main Server Process):
- The **main parent process**
- Also called **postgres process**
- Starts when service starts
- Listens on configured port (default 5432)
- Accepts new connections
- Spawns a new **backend process** for each connection
- Manages background processes
- DBA Command: `ps -ef | grep postgres`


#### ii. Backend Process (One Per Connection):

- Created when a client connects
- Handles:
	- Query parsing
	- Planning
	- Execution
	- Returning results
- Dies when connection closes



#### iii. Background Processes:
- Checkpointer:
    - Writes modified data pages permanently to disk
	- Writes dirty pages from `shared_buffers` to disk 
    - Flushes dirty pages from memory (`shared_buffers`) to disk
    - Creates checkpoint record in WAL
	- Runs periodically
	- Reduces crash recovery time
	
- WAL Writer:
    - Ensures durability of transactions (ACID compliance).
	- Writes WAL (Write Ahead Log) buffers to disk
	- Works with wal_buffers
    - Flushes WAL buffers to `pg_wal/`
    - Runs every few milliseconds


- Background Writer:
	- Writes **dirty pages** from `shared_buffers` to disk gradually
    - Works continuously in background
    - Reduces I/O spikes during checkpoints
	- Prevents sudden checkpoint I/O spike

- Autovacuum Launcher:
	- Spawns autovacuum workers
	- Prevents table bloat
	- Manages MVCC cleanup

- Archiver (If WAL Archiving Enabled):
	- Copies completed WAL files to archive location
	- Required for PITR


- Logical Replication Launcher:
	- Manages logical replication workers



### `shared_buffers` in PostgreSQL:

`shared_buffers` is the amount of memory PostgreSQL uses for caching table and index data. Setting `shared_buffers = 128MB` is a common default or low-memory configuration in PostgreSQL.
- Stored in RAM
- Used by all backend processes
- Primary cache before reading/writing data to disk (base/ files)


#### How shared_buffers Works:

1. When a query reads a table:
    - PostgreSQL checks shared_buffers first
    - If page exists → cache hit → fast, no disk I/O
    - If not → reads page from disk → stores in shared_buffers → may replace another page

2. When a page is updated (INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE):
    - Modified in shared_buffers → becomes a dirty page
    - WAL written first → ensures durability
    - Background Writer or Checkpointer flushes dirty pages to disk




### Dirty Page:

A dirty page is a data page in memory (shared_buffers) that has been modified but not yet written to disk.

- When you execute an `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, or `DELETE`, PostgreSQL modifies the page in memory first.
- That page becomes “dirty” because it differs from what’s stored on disk.
- WAL (Write-Ahead Log) records are generated **before** actual page flush.
- Dirty pages eventually need to be flushed to disk to ensure durability.
- monitor dirty pages and buffer usage via system views: `SELECT * FROM pg_stat_bgwriter;`




### VACUUM vs Autovacuum:

Both are used to **clean up dead tuples** (old versions of rows) and manage **table bloat created by MVCC**, but they differ in how and when they run.


#### VACUUM (Manual / Explicit):

`VACUUM` is a manual command executed by a DBA or script to clean up dead tuples.

- Frees space occupied by dead tuples
- Updates visibility map → helps index-only scans
- Can be combined with ANALYZE to update statistics:


```
VACUUM table_name;
VACUUM ANALYZE table_name;
```

- Does not lock the table for reads/writes (non-blocking)
- Full vacuum (VACUUM FULL) locks the table, rewrites it entirely, and reclaims disk space


#### Autovacuum (Automatic):

autovacuum is a background process that automatically triggers `VACUUM` and `ANALYZE` as needed.
- Enabled by default (`autovacuum = on`)
- Runs continuously in the background
- Automatically tracks:
    - Number of dead tuples
    - Table activity
    - Table size

- Check autovacuum stats:
```
SELECT relname, n_dead_tup, last_autovacuum, last_vacuum
FROM pg_stat_user_tables;
```



## 2. PostgreSQL Memory Architecture: 

Memory is divided into:
- Shared Memory (Global)
- Local Memory (Per Backend Process)

### i. Shared Memory (Global): 
Allocated at server startup.

#### shared_buffers:
- Main data cache
- Stores table pages

#### wal_buffers:
- Stores WAL records before writing to disk

#### CLOG (Commit Log):
- Stores transaction commit status



### ii. Local Memory (Per Backend Process):

Each client connection spawns a backend process, which allocates local memory for query execution.


#### work_mem:

Used for:
- Sort
- Hash joins
- Aggregations

Too high value → memory exhaustion.


#### maintenance_work_mem:

Used for:
- VACUUM
- CREATE INDEX
- ALTER TABLE




## 3. PostgreSQL Storage Architecture:


### Base Directory:
- Contains actual database files or data files. Each database has a subdirectory named by its OID. All table and index files reside here.
- Each database = separate OID directory. 

```
base/
```


### Global Directory:
- Cluster-wide metadata: system catalogs, roles, and cluster settings.
- Stores cluster-wide system catalogs.

```
global/
```


### WAL Directory:
- Stores Write Ahead Log files.

```
pg_wal/
```




### Visual Flow:

```
Client Query (UPDATE/INSERT/DELETE)
       |
Backend modifies shared_buffers (dirty page)
       |
       +--> WAL written to pg_wal
       |
       +--> Background Writer gradually writes to base/
       |
Checkpoint flushes all dirty pages to base/
```




## Query Execution Flow (Step-by-Step):

1. Client sends query
2. Postmaster assigns backend process
3. Parser checks syntax
4. Planner generates execution plan
5. Executor runs query
6. Data read from:
    - shared_buffers (if cached)
    - Disk (if not cached)
7. WAL generated (if DML)
8. Result returned to client





